CONSENSUS METADATA STANDARD: SITE IDENTIFIER (Site)


REVISION DATE: September 20, 2000.


CHECK FOR LATEST VERSION ONLINE: Before using this document, and
periodically thereafter, please check for an updated version at
 http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/programs/NARSTO/metadatastandards.  The latest
version will be called consensus_site_id_standard.

SCOPE

This specification describes a standard for identifying fixed sites used by
studies or networks for air quality sampling and monitoring.  Future
expansion may incorporate advice or standards for mobile sites.  This
standard will be used by the USEPA Supersites program and by Canada's
NAtChem, and it will be recommended as a site identifier convention by the
NARSTO Quality Systems Science Center.  Studies or networks using this
standard will maintain lists of sites for reference by others.


SUMMARY

A site will be assigned a 12-character site identifier which includes a
four-character site abbreviation (also known as a "site mnemonic").  The
first four characters identify a study or network.  Studies or networks
using this standard will maintain a Web-accessible or otherwise available
site list carrying the site identifiers and additional variables with
information about each site, and they will inform the NARSTO QSSC of this. 
The most important additional variables are latitude and longitude in units
of decimal degrees, with negative signs for south latitudes and west
longitudes; and elevation above mean sea level of the ground level at the
site in units of meters. Also highly recommended are the state, county, and
monitor ID fields of the EPA AIRS identifier, if the site has one, and
information about land use and type of location.  Additional, detailed
information about sites should be kept in study/network databases.  Site
abbreviations should be consistent across studies and networks where
possible. 


SPECIFICATIONS

These are the detailed mandatory specifications.  Recommended guidelines 
and optional procedures are in the next section. 

 1. Site identifier construction: The NARSTO Standard Site Identifier will
be constructed as follows.  The full 12 columns must be used, and no blanks
are permitted.

COLUMNS         CONTENTS

01-04           Study or network acronym (see Appendix A), beginning
                with a character
05-06           Country code (following the ISO3166 Standard)
07-08           State or Province code (from the NARSTO Data Management
                Handbook; see References)
09-12           Site abbreviation (site mnemonic), beginning with a
                character

 2. Additional information: Each study or network participating in this
standard will maintain a master list of site identifiers and available key
information, preferably accessible from the Internet with a Web browser and
also downloadable, but in any case able to be provided on request. The key
information, when available, will be provided in the specified units or
using the specified nomenclature.  Location (latitude, longitude, and
elevation data) are the most important key information; every effort must
be made to provide these. Latitude and longitude data will be in units of
decimal degrees, with negative signs for south latitudes and west
longitudes.  Elevation will be elevation above mean sea level of the ground
level at the site in units of meters.  Also highly recommended as key
information are the EPA AIRS site identifier, if available, and information
about land use and location type.  The state (2 digits), county (3 digits),
and monitor ID (4 digits) fields (as a single string of nine digits) of the
EPA AIRS identifier, if the site has one, will be stored as a character
string. If the site has no AIRS identifier, the text "NONE" will be stored
instead.  If it is not known whether the site has an AIRS identifier, the
text "UNKNOWN" should be stored; this is discouraged.  Also, land use and
location type information, using the EPA AIRS specification, should be
provided (see IMPLEMENTATION secion below)

 3. Uniqueness: For a given site, the 12-character site name must be unique
in the global list.  Therefore, for a given network, country, and state,
the site abbreviation (columns 9-12) must be distinct.

 4. Upper case: Study/network lists and other reference lists will maintain
site identifiers in upper case.  Uniqueness will be based on the
characters, and will be case-insensitive.

 5. Allowable characters: The site identifier will be constructed of
letters in the standard alphabet (A through Z), the numbers 0 through 9,
and the underscore character.  All 12 characters must be non-blank.  The
last character of the site identifier can be repeated to avoid blanks, or
underscore (_) character(s) can be used instead of a blank.

 6. Begin identifier and abbreviation with a character: Neither the site
identifier (the full 12- character field) nor the site abbreviation
(characters 9-12) may begin with a number or underscore.  Stated
differently, characters 1 and 9 in the site identifier must be alphabetic.


GUIDANCE

 7. Recommended use: Columns 9-12 can be used as a site abbreviation when a
shorter name is needed for mapping or similar purposes.  The site
abbreviation should be mnemonic for the site's common name, to the extent
this can be accomplished without causing a conflict with existing
abbreviations.

 8. Ubiquity : The same four character site abbreviation should, if
possible, be used to represent this same site if it is used in other
studies or networks (where the first four characters of the 12 would
differ). However, this is not a requirement.

 9. Intra-network uniqueness (optional): Within a given network (as defined
by the first four characters), the site abbreviations should be kept
distinct, even if they are in a different state/province and therefore
would not strictly need to be distinct.

10. Co-located instruments: Co-location information should not be embedded
in the site names.  Rather, when multiple instruments are used at a site,
other means should be used to indicate which data are to be considered
primary and which not primary.  For example, the instrument identifier
could carry a leading field indicating P for primary instruments, or Cx
(where x is a number) for co-located instruments.

11. Additional information: Additional information [beyond the key
information identified in item (2) above] is relevant for sites, and should
be maintained by study/network data systems. This includes the site
abbreviation (carried as a separate field to facilitate searches); a common
name; a site description (e.g., address); a city where relevant; the
county; method used to obtain location coordinates; accuracy of the
location coordinates; and other information.  The EPA AIRS AQS Data
Dictionary contains a list of variables (fields) that could be considered
(available by download from http://www.epa.gov/ttn/airs/airsmans.html)

12. Indication of sampling elevation: The site's elevation information
characterizes the ground level. Samples or measurements are typically taken
above ground level.  The measurement or sampling height(s) should be
provided as part of the data or metadata.

IMPLEMENTATION

     Study or Network Acronyms

We anticipate that this list will expand considerably in future.

EPA Supersites study names: The EPA Supersites Studies (and the Canadian
Supersite) will be differentiated to carry the individual Supersites, as
follows.  C denotes Canada, E denotes EPA; S denotes Supersites study; 1 or
2 denotes Phase 1 or 2, and the fourth character denotes the particular
Supersite.  For Canada, which does not identify phases, the third and
fourth characters denote Toronto, the focus of the study.

 CSTO - Toronto Supersite
 ES1A - Atlanta Supersite
 ES2B - Baltimore Supersite
 ES2F - Fresno Supersite
 ES2G - Gulf Coast (Texas) Supersite
 ES2L - LA Supersite
 ES2N - New York Supersite
 ES2P - Pittsburgh Supersite
 ES2S - St. Louis Supersite


     Examples of names

These are some fictitious examples of names using this convention.

 ES2FUSCAASPN (fictitious Aspen Springs site)
 ES2GUSTXCRPC (fictitious Corpus Christi site)
 CSTOCAONNCHQ (fictitious NAtChem Headquarters site)


     Specification of Land Use and Location Type

Land use and location type are highly recommended additional information to
provide.  The definitions below were taken on June 20, 2000 from
http://www.epa.gov/airsdata/help/hmoncols.htm

Land use: The prevalent land use within 1/4 mile of the site.  Values are:
Residential; Commercial; Industrial; Agricultural; Forest; Desert; Mobile;
Blighted; and Not Available.

Location type:  A general characterization of the setting where the site is
located.  Values are: Urban/ Center City; Suburban; Rural; and Not
Available.


     Master List of Site Identifiers for USEPA Supersites Program

We anticipate that a master list of site names from the Supersites program
will be assembled from the individual Supersites lists early in Phase 3 of
the Supersites program.  The master list would include, from the individual
Supersites lists, the recommended additional information about each site,
as available: latitude, longitude, and elevation; EPA AIRS identifier; land
use category; and location type category.


     Recommended Format for Transmittal of Site Identifier Data

We recommend that exchanges of site identifiers files (with the recommended
additional information) be done using comma-separated format to provide
information in this order: site identifier, latitude, longitude, elevation,
EPA AIRS identifier (or NONE or UNKNOWN), land use, and location type.  
The first record should identify the variable names, and the second row
units ("decimal degrees" for lat and lon; "meters asl" for elevation;
"none" for the character variables).


REFERENCES

NARSTO Data Management Handbook (ORNL/CDIAC-112/R2), 1999, S.W. 
Christensen, T.A. Boden, L.A. Hook, and M.-D. Cheng. (Preparation and
electronic publishing by NARSTO Quality Systems Science Center)
(http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/programs/NARSTO/).  Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.


DEVELOPMENT BACKGROUND

The EPA Supersites program recognized, in March 2000, a need for
standardization of key metadata, including site names (identifiers).  The
NARSTO/Supersites Data Management Working Group (DMWG) discussed site
naming standards in many conference calls (see
ftp://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/.private/narsto/ssdmwg/minutes).  In particular,
Bill Sukloff (Environment Canada), Dave Sullivan (TNRCC/TEXAQS), and Sig
Christensen (NARSTO QSSC) worked this issue and brought proposals back to
the DMWG. The resulting standard is similar to that used by Canada's
NAtChem; will support both Supersites and international site names (and
therefore would be suitable for adoption by NARSTO), and contains site
abbreviations (short site mnemonic names) that can be used for map labels.  
Les Hook reviewed the near-final draft, and proposed the standard syntax
shown here for presenting the specification.  On August 15, the DMWG
approved changes that clarified that elevation is of the ground level at
the site, and that measurement or sampling height should be specified as
part of the data or metadata.  On September 20, the heading material was
changed to warn the user to check for the latest version before
use, and the standard was moved to the NARSTO Web site.
